---
layout: post
title: Lab Report 
---

## Summary 

The 3301 Operation System seen in the 2013 Cicada 3301 challenge is nothing more than Tiny Core 4.7.2 plus six extra files.

## Disclaimer/Warning

I tried to make my work here as safe as possible, but I am not an IT specialist. Nothing terrible happened on my end when I ran all these commands. Still, you do it all at your own risk!

## Introduction 

If you don't know what the Cicada 3301 puzzle is, you can get caught up at the excellent [fandom wiki](https://uncovering-cicada.fandom.com/wiki/Uncovering_Cicada_Wiki). Currently I'm looking at the remaining unsolved piece of the puzzle, the yet-to-be-decrypted pages of the ["Liber Primus."](https://uncovering-cicada.fandom.com/wiki/Liber_Primus_Unsolved_Pages)

I'm new to the Cicada 3301 puzzle and like many newcomers have had high hopes for an easy find. Of course if finds were
easy the Liber Primus would have been de-crypted already! Still, I thought I would document my first foray into turning over
rocks, since I don't think this exact journey has been traced online yet. My goal is to document my process so that it can be reproduced, at least on a comparable environment (I am running linux, specifically Ubuntu 22.04).  I also provide a [github repository](https://github.com/mae3301/ISO_experiment) containing a shell script with many of the commands I ran at the terminal and the python script I used to do more intensive analysis. 

One of the creative parts of the 2013 puzzle I admire is the introduction of a clue in the form of an [operating system](https://uncovering-cicada.fandom.com/wiki/What_Happened_Part_1_(2013)#The_System), called the 3301 OS for its file name. It is known that this operating system is based on the [Tiny Core operating system](http://tinycorelinux.net/), a small form of linux often used in embedded systems. Known files in the 3301 operating system were used to reach the next stage of the puzzle. Still, since an entire OS was involved, I thought maybe there were files that hadn't yet been found and might provide new information. Or maybe there was some source of corruption in the operating system itself.  Looking at the files and binary of a small OS seems in line with other challenges in the cicada playbook.  

## Method

My first step was to get a copy of the [file](https://mega.nz/file/N1oXRD5T#I22-ukwhArw1uBV5FCyegCc5Os996rtcKl5sqBKdbrw) containing the 3301 operating system, as well as some other materials.  The files are stored on an optical disc, or ISO, image. The md5sum checksum of the image is 74062dee4093c6ca0340cda23f0e994b. 

Next I loaded up the the 3301 OS using virtualbox. I found the version of Tiny Core associated with it by using the following command:
```bash
cat /usr/share/doc/tc/release.txt
```

Traveling over to the Tiny Core website, I downloaded the [4.7.2 release](http://tinycorelinux.net/4.x/x86/archive/4.7.2/) for comparison. According [a post](http://forum.tinycorelinux.net/index.php/topic,14560.0.html) on the message board, this release was first made available on December 22, 2012. At that point the Tiny Core project was releasing a patch every month or so.   My actual process involved some trial and errors, but file size ultimately makes it clear Cicada used the core option. The md5sum of the Tiny Core ISO image is 0137ff8b2b24149b9c4d24c7dab2ec72.

To compare the two operating systems I looked at a summary of the entire ISO file using the ```isoinfo``` command. Then I examined the md5sum of the *vmlinuz* file in each ISO.  According to the Tiny Core website, this is the file that contains the kernel of the operating system.

I returned to the running 3301 system and found the files that Cicada is known to have added.  Next I extracted, unzipped, and un-archived the core files from each ISO. For these last tasks I used the command line tools ```isoinfo```, ```gunzip```, and ```cpio``` respectively.  Note: cpio is an archiving format that is an alternative to the more common tar. 

The commands I ran are in the repository at *prepare.sh.*

Once I had the filesystems available locally, I used a python script, *check_fs.p*y, to enumerate both filesystems recursively and compare them file by file using the md5sum hash. I tried my best to exclude symbolic links and various special file types that don't take kindly to being opened and hopefully are not relevant to my examination anyway. Still a handful of the attempts to open files generated errors and these are logged by the script. As I said, nothing terrible happened, but you do this kind of comprehensive recursive enumeration and opening of files at your own risk. If you'd rather not take it, just trust my report of results below.

## Results ##

First, *vmlinuz* has the same md5sum in both 3301 and Tiny Core, ff666714e537dca1cc1b8bfea044497f.

Next, ```isoinfo``` reveals the following about the 3301 operating system under the heading "Directory listing of /BOOT/."

|file size| date updated|filename|
|:------:|:----------:|:--------:|
|5494774| Jan  3 2013 | 3301.IMG;1|
|2048| Dec 29 2012 | ISOLINUX |
|2491968| Dec 24 2012 |VMLINUZ.;1| 

From my analysis of the filesystems, I found that the only different files by file path were the six in the 3301 OS that are already comman knowledge. Below is a chart showing their names, sizes, locations, dates updated, and whether or not they provided information for the challenge in 2013. The files have date stamps slightly after December 27, 2012, where a cursory inspection shows that other files in the operating system have date stamps of December 27, 2012. By md5sum the files *wisdom* and *folly* are verified to be the same. Note that these last files are binary "junk" as far as anyone knows, and have not played a role in any challenges.
 
| filename | file size | location | date updated|helped a challenge|
|:------:|:------:|:------------:|:-----------:|:---------------:|
| *folly*       | 3368 kb       |  */tmp/folly* | Jan 3 2013  ||
| *wisdom*      | 3368 kb       | */tmp/wisdom*  | Jan 3 2013  ||
| *cicada*      | 106 kb        |  */usr/local/bin/cicada*| Jan 2 2013   |x|
| *prime_echo*  | 12248 kb      |  */usr/local/bin/prime_echo*       | Dec 30 2013 |x|
| *message.txt*  |   65 kb      |  */usr/local/bin/message.txt*        | Jan 3 2013 |x|
| *message.txt.asc* |   948     | */usr/local/bin/message.txt.asc* | Jan 3 2013 |x|
{: rules:"groups"}


Next I found that all the common files were the same, with the exception of */etc/init.d/tc-config* and */etc/passwd*.  Here I ran a couple ```diff``` commands to see what was up. 
(The code in the Tiny Core OS is shown first and then the code in the 3301 OS.)

```diff
# diff for /etc/passwd
1c1
< root:x:0:0:root:/root:/bin/sh
---
> root:x:0:0:root:/root:/usr/local/bin/cicada
```

```diff
# diff for /etc/init.d/tc-config
249c249
< if [ -n "$SUPERUSER" ]; then
---
> #if [ -n "$SUPERUSER" ]; then
251c251
< fi
---
> #fi
```

I believe that the change in */etc/passwd* was made to cause the special behavior on boot of the cicada operating system--namely the display of the primes and the message. 


I am not sure of the reason behind it the change to */etc/init.d/tc-config*. The line that the if-statement refers to is ```touch /etc/sysconfig/superuser``` This line has something to do with roles and permissions. I am pretty confident it's not a clue.

## Discussion 

Several pieces of information I examined come together to tell a story of how Cicada created the operating system. They downloaded the code on December 24, 2012, began work on the operating system on December 27, 2012, updated it during the next several days by adding the known files, and re-archived, re-zipped, and remade the image. They completed the image on January 3, 2013, two days before they [kicked off](https://uncovering-cicada.fandom.com/wiki/What_Happened_Part_1_(2013)#The_Invitation) the 2013 round of puzzles on the 4chan boards /x/ and /b/.

My conclusion is that 3301 OS's linux kernel is the same as that provided by Tiny Core in their 4.7.2 release. Furthermore, there are no files in the operating system that are not known to solvers already. It seems that it was a quick and straightforward creation once the puzzles themselves had been chosen and reflected in the known files. It is of course possible that *wisdom*/*folly* has some future use, but that's about it.

## Final Words

I would appreciate comments on this report and ask they be left on the [github repository](https://github.com/mae3301/ISO_experiment) for the code. If you're an IT specialist or do forensic analyses on codebases and have suggestions for making my process safer, I'd especially like to hear from you. 
